---
layout: default
title: "d212 2"
---
# Data Mining II – D212 Task II

## Overview

This project involves using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) on a medical dataset to uncover health or readmission patterns. It focuses on simplifying data analysis and visualizations by extracting the most relevant components to identify factors that could reduce readmission rates.

## Objective

The primary goal is to distill the dataset into its most significant components, facilitating easier analysis and visualization while retaining essential patterns and relationships.

## Research Question

Are there underlying health or readmission patterns in the data collected from patients that could help in reducing readmission rates?

## Method Justification

**Use of PCA:** PCA is used to measure variance across features and create principal components that summarize this variance. It aims to simplify the dataset while preserving critical underlying relationships.

**Assumption:** Features must be scaled and standardized to ensure uniform variance importance.

## Data Preparation

**Continuous Variables for PCA:** 

18 continuous features, including Age, Children, Income, VitD_levels, Doc_visits, Full_meals_eaten, vitD_supp, Initial_days, Totalcharge, Additional_charges, and various survey response variables.

**Data Standardization:**
The data was standardized using StandardScaler.

## Analysis

- Principal Components Matrix: Calculated using PCA.
- Number of Principal Components: Identified as 7 using the elbow rule or Kaiser criterion.
- Variance Analysis: Determination of variance for each principal component.
  Total variance captured by the selected principal components.
- Summary of Results:
First 7 principal components capture 63.2% variance.
Suggestion to include more components for a higher variance representation.

## Data Summary and Implications

The analysis using PCA highlighted two distinct groups of data points but also indicated a significant information loss, with only 27.4% of variance contained in the first two principal components. This suggests the need for including more components to achieve a more accurate analysis.
